---
type: posts
layout: single
tags: bioinformatics
title: Notes on sequencing files
excerpt: Some details on SAM/BAM files and related topics
---


### Paired End Reads

In paired end sequencing, each "piece" of DNA gets sequenced from both
ends.  So, for example, if you have 100 bp reads, and a 300 bp
fragment, then you will get the sequence of the first and last 100 bp
of the fragment.  The middle part is missing. (It can also happen that
the two parts overlap).  The aligner matches these two pieces up using
the RNEXT/PNEXT fields and the SAM flags.

If both ends of the read are mapped to the same chromosome, then RNEXT
is '=' and PNEXT is the start position of the paired read.  The TLEN
field gives the distance between the left most and right most bases in
the pair provided both are on the same chromosome, so TLEN is the
length of the entire fragment.
TLEN is positive on the left segment, and negqtive on the right.  The flags can tell you if both fragments are on the forward or reverse strand.  

### PCR Duplicates

Hypothesis is that cuts in the genome for sequencing are random and
independent so the chance of getting two identical reads is
essentially zero.  To get 100x coverage using ~100 bp reads means you
need 30 billion reads of the 30 billion read genome.  So the expected
number of times each base pair is the starting pont of a read is one.
The chance of picking the same starting point twice is 1 in 30
billion.
	
PCR duplicates are flagged in the SAM/BAM file by setting the 0x400
bit in the SAM flags.

When looking at duplicates in paired end sequencing, the aligner tests
if the entire fragment is a duplicate by looking at both of the pieces
-- it's a duplicate if both pieces are idential.

### Comparing the sequence to the reference

The SAM/BAM file contains the sequences together with a variety of
information that allows at least a partial comparison of the sequence
to the reference.  The key fields for this are the CIGAR string, the
NM field, and the MD field.
	
The CIGAR string describes *how* the sequence was mapped against the
reference -- which positions were matched, which skipped, and which
added.  But a 'match' could mean that the corresponding base pairs are
different.  For example, for 100 bp reads, a CIGAR score of 100M means
that the aligner's optimal alignment lines up 100 bases from the read
against 100 base pairs of the reference -- but you can't know from
this how many of those bases might be different.
	
The NM field gives the edit distance between the reference and the
sequence.  So NM:i:0 means an edit distance of zero, so CIGAR of 100M
and NM:i:0 means an exact match.
	
The MD field gives you information about the actual substitutions
compared against the reference.  For example, a CIGAR of 100M and an
MD:Z: field of 2C76A4G4A5C4 means 2 matches, then the reference has a
C, then 76 matches, then the reference has an A, then 4 matches, then
the reference has an A, then 5 matches, then the reference has a C,
then 4 matches.  (Total of 2+1+76+1+4+1+4+1+5+1+4=100).
	
One thing to remember: the MD field won't show insertions into the
seauence because it only provides information about the reference.
However, insertions are marked in the CIGAR string.  So for example,
suppose a 100 base read matches against a 99 base region in the
reference, with one insertion. The CIGAR will look something like
40M1I59M but the MD field would be MD:Z:99 -- this tells us that there
are 40 identical bases, then an insertion of 1 base in the read, then
another 49 matches.  Then inserted base is in position 41 of the read.
	
	
	

	
