---
type: post
layout: single
title: deFinetti's Theorem Part II
excerpt: some links to follow up results on deFinetti's Theorem
tags: math
---

## Some further references on deFinetti's Theorem

- P. Diaconis, [Finite Forms of deFinetti's Theorem on Exchangeability](http://statweb.stanford.edu/~sabatti/Stat370/synthese.pdf)

This paper shows how the problem of exchangeability can be interpreted geometrically and proves some "approximate" versions of the
theorem for finite sequences. 

- G. R. Wood, [Binomial Mixtures and Finite Exchangeability](https://projecteuclid.org/download/pdf_1/euclid.aop/1176989684).

This paper considers the problem of extending a finite exchangeable sequence to an infinite one; and also the problem of
determining how likely it is that a randomly chosen distribution on $0,\ldots, n$ will be a mixture of binomial distributions.
The questions turn out to be closely related.  The paper gives a formula computing the fraction of binomial mixtures
among all distributions (which turns out to go to zero VERY quickly with increasing $n$) and then relates that to
the probability that an $n$ exchangeable sequence is infinitely extendible (which also goes to zero very quickly with $n$). 

The results amount to some (non-trivial!) calculations of volumes of regions in simplices. 

Apparently as of the time of this paper there was a conjecture due to Crisma giving a formula for the probability that an
exchangeable sequence of $n$ random variables can be extended to one of length $r$ that was unsolved, what is its current status?


- P. Diaconis and D. Freedman, [Finite Exchangeable Sequences](https://projecteuclid.org/download/pdf_1/euclid.aop/1176994663)

This paper computes the distance between the distribution of $k$ exchangeable random variables taking values in a (finite) set $S$
and the closest mixture of IID random variables.  To explain (one of) their theorems, represent a
probability distribution on $S$ as a point in the $|S|$-dimensional simplex. Suppose $\mu$ is a probability distribution on this simplex.
Given such a probability distribution $\mu$, let $P(k,\mu)$ be the distribution on $S$ from $\mu$, and then making $k$ iid choices from this $\mu$. 

**Theorem:** Let $S$ be a finite set with $|S|$ elements.  Let $P$ be an exchangeable probability on $S^{n}$.  Then there is a probability $\mu$
on the $|S|$-simplex so that $\|P_{k}-P(k,\mu)\|\le 2|S|k/n$ for all $k\le n$.  Here $P_{k}$ is the marginal probability of $P$ on sequences of length $k\le n$. 

In other words, if $P$ is a distribution on sequences of length $k$ that can be extended to an exchangeable sequence of length $n$, then
$P$ is within distance $k/n$ of a "mixture."

The distance here is "variation distance" $\|P-Q\|=2\sup_A\|P(A)-Q(A)\|$ over Borel sets $A$.
